Add basic iOS phi-3 sample (#433)
microsoft/onnxruntime-inference-examples: mobile/examples/phi-3/ios/LocalLLM/LocalLLM/README.md

   
  3. It is recommended to directly use the latest iOS SDK for compilation. Of course, you can also lower the version to be compatible with past SDKs.

#### **C. Compiling Generative AI with ONNX Runtime for iOS**

```bash

git clone https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-genai

cd onnxruntime-genai

python3 build.py --parallel --build_dir ./build_iphoneos --ios --ios_sysroot iphoneos --ios_arch arm64 --ios_deployment_target 16.6 --cmake_generator Xcode

```

#### **D. Copy over latest header files and required .dylibs built from source**

If you build from source and get the latest .dylibs for ORT and ORT GenAI, please copy the .dylibs over to `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\lib` and copy the latest header files over to `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\header` 

The resulting header directory should correctly contains:
`mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\header\libonnxruntime-genai.dylib`

> `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\header\libonnxruntime.1.19.0.dylib`

Reviewer: Should this be the `lib` directory?

Author: fixed.

#### **C. Compiling Generative AI with ONNX Runtime for iOS**

```bash

git clone https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-genai

cd onnxruntime-genai

python3 build.py --parallel --build_dir ./build_iphoneos --ios --ios_sysroot iphoneos --ios_arch arm64 --ios_deployment_target 16.6 --cmake_generator Xcode

```

#### **D. Copy over latest header files and required .dylibs built from source**

If you build from source and get the latest .dylibs for ORT and ORT GenAI, please copy the .dylibs over to `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\lib` and copy the latest header files over to `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\header` 

Usually the build output path for libonnxruntime.dylib is under `<ORT_PROJECT_ROOT>/build/intermediates/<platform>_<arch>/<build_config>/<build_config-platform>/libonnxruntime.dylib` and the build output path for libonnxruntime-genai.dylib is under `<ORT_GENAI_PROJECT_ROOT>/build/<build_config-platform>/libonnxruntime-genai.dylib`. For example: 
it may look like: `onnxruntime/build/intermediates/iphoneos_arm64/Release/Release-iphoneos/libonnxruntime.1.19.0.dylib`

> and similarly `onnxruntime-genai/build/Release/Release-iphoneos/libonnxruntime-genai.dylib`.

Reviewer: nit: We need to fix the genai ios build to include the architecture in the output path.

Author: right good catch.. - forgot how xcode generate those path, but possibly a build variable is not correctly set up for "ARCHS"

> Usually the build output path for libonnxruntime.dylib is under `<ORT_PROJECT_ROOT>/build/intermediates/<platform>_<arch>/<build_config>/<build_config-platform>/libonnxruntime.dylib` and the build output path for libonnxruntime-genai.dylib is under `<ORT_GENAI_PROJECT_ROOT>/build/<build_config-platform>/libonnxruntime-genai.dylib`. For example: 
> it may look like: `onnxruntime/build/intermediates/iphoneos_arm64/Release/Release-iphoneos/libonnxruntime.1.19.0.dylib`
> and similarly `onnxruntime-genai/build/Release/Release-iphoneos/libonnxruntime-genai.dylib`.
> (The absolute path may be slightly different based on build folder/config/architecture.)
> 
> The resulting header directory should correctly contains:
> `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\lib\libonnxruntime-genai.dylib`
> `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\lib\libonnxruntime.1.19.0.dylib`
> 
> And the source header files required including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build output path for libonnxruntime.dylib is `<ORT_PROJECT_ROOT>/build/intermediates/<platform>_<arch>/<build_config>/<build_config-platform>/libonnxruntime.dylib` 
The build output path for libonnxruntime-genai.dylib is `<ORT_GENAI_PROJECT_ROOT>/build/<build_config-platform>/libonnxruntime-genai.dylib`. 

For example: 
- `onnxruntime/build/intermediates/iphoneos_arm64/Release/Release-iphoneos/libonnxruntime.1.19.0.dylib`
- `onnxruntime-genai/build/Release/Release-iphoneos/libonnxruntime-genai.dylib`.

Note that you will need to build and copy the correct dylib for the target architecture you wish to run the app on.
e.g. 
if you want to run on the iOS simulator on an Intel mac, you must build both onnxruntime and onnxruntime-genai for x86_64 and copy the dylibs to the app's `lib` directory.
if you want to run on an iPhone, you must build both onnxruntime and onnxruntime-genai for arm64 and copy the dylibs to the app's `lib` directory.

The header files to copy are:
```

# **Local LLM sample application running Phi3-mini on iOS**

## **Steps**

### **A. Preparation**

1. macOS 14+

2. Xcode 15+

3. iOS SDK 17.x (iPhone 14 or iPhone 15 powered by a A16 or A17)

4. Install Python 3.10+ (Conda is recommended)

5. Install the Python library - python-flatbuffers

6. Install CMake

### **B. Compiling ONNX Runtime for iOS**

```bash

git clone https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime.git

cd onnxruntime

./build.sh --build_shared_lib --ios --skip_tests --parallel --build_dir ./build_ios --ios --apple_sysroot iphoneos --osx_arch arm64 --apple_deploy_target 16.6 --cmake_generator Xcode --config Release

```

***Notice***

  1. Before compiling, you must ensure that Xcode is configured correctly and set it on the terminal

```bash

sudo xcode-select -switch /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer 

```

>   2. ONNX Runtime needs to be compiled based on different platforms. For iOS, you can compile based on arm64 / x86_64

Reviewer: Might be good to explain how the user should pick the platform.

x86_64 if they have an Intel mac to run the simulator.
arm64 for an ARM based mac to run the simulator, 
arm64 to run on device.

  3. It is recommended to directly use the latest iOS SDK for compilation. Of course, you can also lower the version to be compatible with past SDKs.

### **C. Compiling Generative AI with ONNX Runtime for iOS**

```bash

git clone https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-genai

cd onnxruntime-genai

> python3 build.py --parallel --build_dir ./build_iphoneos --ios --ios_sysroot iphoneos --ios_arch arm64 --ios_deployment_target 17.4 --cmake_generator Xcode

Reviewer: nit: this has deployment target of 17.4 and the ORT command has 16.6. can these use the same value for consistency/less potential confusion?

# **Local LLM sample application running Phi3-mini on iOS**

## **Steps**

### General prerequisites

See the general prerequisites [here](../../../../../README.md#General-Prerequisites).

For this application, the following prerequisites are preferred:

1. macOS 14+

2. Xcode 15+ (latest Xcode version perferred.)

3. iOS SDK 16.x + (iPhone 14 or iPhone 15 powered by a A16 or A17 preferred)

**Note**: 
  The current Xcode project contains a built .dylib for ORT and ORT GenAI. The following steps `A, B, C` under `step 1.` for building from source for the libraries are optional.
  However if you want to build from source to include the latest updates, please use the `step 1.` as a reference.

### 1. Steps to build from source for ONNX Runtime and Generative AI libraries [Optional]

#### **A. Preparation**

1. Install Python 3.10+

2. Install flatbuffers
  ```
    pip3 install flatbuffers
  ```

3. Install [CMake](https://cmake.org/download/)

#### **B. Compiling ONNX Runtime for iOS**

```bash

git clone https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime.git

cd onnxruntime

> ./build.sh --build_shared_lib --ios --skip_tests --parallel --build_dir ./build_ios --ios --apple_sysroot iphoneos --osx_arch arm64 --apple_deploy_target 16.6 --cmake_generator Xcode --config Release

Reviewer 2: nit: two `--ios` options

```

***Notice***

  1. Before compiling, you must ensure that Xcode is configured correctly and set it on the terminal

```bash

sudo xcode-select -switch /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer 

```

>   1. ONNX Runtime needs to be compiled based on different platforms. For iOS, you can compile for arm64 or x86_64 based on needs. If you are running an iOS simulator on an Intel mac, compile for x86_64. Use arm64 for an ARM based mac to run the simulator, and to run on an iPhone.

Reviewer: Nit: Two '1' items

   
  2. It is recommended to directly use the latest iOS SDK for compilation. Of course, you can also lower the version to be compatible with past SDKs.

#### **C. Compiling Generative AI with ONNX Runtime for iOS**

```bash

git clone https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime-genai

cd onnxruntime-genai

python3 build.py --parallel --build_dir ./build_iphoneos --ios --ios_sysroot iphoneos --ios_arch arm64 --ios_deployment_target 16.6 --cmake_generator Xcode

```

#### **D. Copy over latest header files and required .dylibs built from source**

If you build from source and get the latest .dylibs for ORT and ORT GenAI, please copy the .dylibs over to `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\lib` and copy the latest header files over to `mobile\examples\phi-3\ios\LocalLLM\LocalLLM\header`.

Source header files required including:

> `<ORT_MAIN_SOURCE_REPO>/onnxruntime/core/session/onnxruntime_c_api.h`,

Reviewer: Can you include the source paths for the two dylib as well?

Author: hmm in this optional step, the two dylibs should be built from user? so the source paths depend on their build paths. I mentioned the relative path to copy to for the "two .dylibs".

Author: I added a couple lines to explicitly say how the header file structure should look like after copying .dylibs.

Reviewer: It's the location of the dylib in the build output that can be confusing. We have 2 explicit build.py commands that we can use as the source of the dylib. 

We can mention that those paths need to be updated based on the actual config and architecture used.
